SOURCE: carlosecortes — rose-hill/index

Rose Hill | Carlos E. Cortés 

 Rose Hill

 Rose Hill: An Intermarriage before Its Time (Berkeley, California: Heyday, 2012)

 A memoir of intercultural cross-fire and societal border-crossing.

 “Dad was a Mexican Catholic. Mom was a Kansas City-born Jew with Eastern European immigrant parents. They fell in love in Berkeley, California, and got married in Kansas City, Missouri.

 That alone would not have been a big deal. But it happened in 1933, when such marriages were rare. And my parents spent most of their lives in Kansas City, a place both racially segregated and religiously divided.

 Mom and Dad chose to be way ahead of their time; I didn’t. But because of them, I had to be. My mixed background meant that, however unwillingly, I had to learn to live as an outsider.”

 Follow Rose Hill on Facebook 

 Publisher’s Page 

 Reading from Chapter one of  Rose Hill. 

 Share this:
 
 Click to share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Like Loading... 

 2 comments on “ Rose Hill ”

 Pingback: Video for Rose Hill | Carlos E. Cortes now up | E.A. Polanco 

 Hi, Ed. Hope all is going well with you. Guillermo Ortega was just in my office. He’s here for a few weeks before heading back to U. of Houston. We created a new video that is now posted under Books on my website, showing me reading “Memories,” which appeared in my new book of poetry, “Fourth Quarter: Reflections of a Cranky Old Man.” 

 Until soon,

 Carlos

 Reply 

 Leave a comment Cancel reply 

 Recent Posts

 Fourth Quarter: Reflections of a Cranky Old Man — book of poetry published by Bad Knee Press, available on Amazon. 

 “Fourth Quarter” to be published. 

 Cultural Competence in the Health Professions 

 Summer Institute for Intercultural Communication, July, 2016 

 Harvard Management Development Program 

 Archives

 January 2017 

 August 2016 

 May 2016 

 January 2016 

 September 2015 

 November 2014 

 June 2012 

 May 2012 

 April 2012 

 January 2012 

 Categories

 A Conversation with Alana 

 Book Reading 

 Lecture 

 Uncategorized 

 Meta

 Create account 
 Log in 

 Entries feed 

 Comments feed 

 WordPress.com 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Carlos E. Cortés 

 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 

 Carlos E. Cortés 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Sign up 

 Log in 

 Copy shortlink 

 Report this content 

 View post in Reader 

 Manage subscriptions 

 Collapse this bar 

 %d
