SOURCE: carlosecortes — lectures-and-workshops/index

Lectures and Workshops | Carlos E. Cortés 

 Lectures and Workshops

 MOST-REQUESTED PRESENTATIONS 

 A Conversation with Alana: One Boy’s Multicultural Rite of Passage — A mesmerizing, thought-provoking 65-minute one-person autobiographical play about growing up of mixed parentage in racially-segregated, religiously-divided early post-World-War-II Kansas City, Missouri.

 “Dora the Explorer” and “Go, Diego, Go!”: Anatomy of a Modern Social Phenomenon — An insider’s look at the fascinating story and surprising complexities of these two popular pre-school television shows, presented by their Creative/Cultural Advisor.

 The New Multiculturalism — An inconoclastic examination of the sometimes hackneyed topic of multiculturalism, filled with unexpected angles and thought-provoking insights.

 How the Media Teach about Diversity — An entertaining, informative, and eye-opening trip through the mass media’s informal, unofficial multicultural curriculum, drawn from decades of research for his popular book, “The Children Are Watching: How the Media Teach about Diversity.”

 Rose Hill: An Intermarriage before Its Time –- Selections from his riveting memoir of cross-cultural conflict and societal border crossing.

 English Language Learners and the American Future: A Nation Left Behind? — An honest, incisive look at the often-unrecognized educational dimensions necessary for helping these young people become fully participating members of U.S. society.

 The Changing Face of America — A futuristic look at the opportunities and challenges raised by different types of diversity in the United States, including their relationship with often-overlooked global continuities and changes.

 SPECIALTY LECTURES AND WORKSHOPS 

 My Time Is Not Your Time: Perception and Misperception WhenCultures Collide

 Learning To Be Lucky: Seven Ways to Control the Fates…Before They Control You

 How to Succeed in Consulting Without Really Trying…At Least Not Too Hard

 Reaching Across: Mentoring in a Multicultural Society

 You and Your Autobiography: The Joy of Taking a Personal Journey through Your Past

 The Many Masks of Multiculturalism

 SELECTED ADDITIONAL TOPICS 

 Latinos and the American Future   

 Multicultural Curricular Integration

 Ethical Dilemmas of a Diverse Society

 Rethinking Privilege: Anatomy of a Complex Social Process

 Leadership in a Multicultural Society

 The Development of Mixed-Race Identity

 * * * * *

 On Saturday, October 3, 2015, I will be giving the banquet address at the national conference of the National Association for Multicultural Education.

 Share this:
 
 Click to share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Like Loading... 

 2 comments on “ Lectures and Workshops ”

 When where is Changing Face of America presentation-my son is a PhD Soc at Harvard and wants to join me during summer break in Southern California-thanks

 Reply 

 Hi, Jeff. Not sure when you posted your letter, but I just ran across it. Sorry to be so slow in responding.

 Carlos

 Reply 

 Leave a comment Cancel reply 

 Recent Posts

 Fourth Quarter: Reflections of a Cranky Old Man — book of poetry published by Bad Knee Press, available on Amazon. 

 “Fourth Quarter” to be published. 

 Cultural Competence in the Health Professions 

 Summer Institute for Intercultural Communication, July, 2016 

 Harvard Management Development Program 

 Archives

 January 2017 

 August 2016 

 May 2016 

 January 2016 

 September 2015 

 November 2014 

 June 2012 

 May 2012 

 April 2012 

 January 2012 

 Categories

 A Conversation with Alana 

 Book Reading 

 Lecture 

 Uncategorized 

 Meta

 Create account 
 Log in 

 Entries feed 

 Comments feed 

 WordPress.com 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Carlos E. Cortés 

 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 

 Carlos E. Cortés 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Sign up 

 Log in 

 Copy shortlink 

 Report this content 

 View post in Reader 

 Manage subscriptions 

 Collapse this bar 

 %d
